CHAPTER VII My first quarter at Lowood seemed an age,
and not the Golden Age, either.
It comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties
in habituating myself to new rules and unwanted tasks.
The fear of failure in these points
harassed me worse than the physical hardships of my lot,
though these were no trifles.
During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows,
and after the melting, the almost impassable roads
prevented our stirring beyond the garden walls,
except to go to church.
But within these limits, we had to pass an hour every day
in the open air.
Our clothing was insufficient to protect us
from the severe cold.
We had no boots.
The snow got into our shoes and melted there.
Our ungloved hands became numbed and covered with chilglains,
as were our feet.
I remember well the distracting irritation
I endured from this cause every evening,
when my feet inflamed and the torture of thrusting
the swelled, raw, and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning.
Then the scanty supply of food was distressing.
With a keen appetite of growing children,
we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid.
From this deficiency of nourishment
resulted in abuse, which pressed hardly on the younger pupils.
Whenever the famished great girls had an opportunity,
they would coax or menace the little ones out
of their portion.
Many a time I have shared between two claimants
the precious morsel of brown bread distributed at teatime.
And after relinquishing to a third half the contents
of a mug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder
with an accompaniment of secret tears, forced for me
by the exigency of hunger.
Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season.
We had to walk two miles to Brocklebridge Church,
where our patron officiated.
We set out cold.
We arrived at Church colder.
During the morning service, we became almost paralyzed.
It was too far to return to dinner.
And an allowance of cold meat and bread,
in the same penorious proportion observed
in our ordinary meals, was served round
between the services.
At the close of the afternoon service,
we returned by an exposed and hilly road,
where the bitter winter wind, blowing
over a range of snowy summits to the north,
almost flayed the skin from our faces.
I can remember Miss Temple walking
lightly and rapidly along our drooping line,
her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered,
gathered close about her, and encouraging us,
by precept and example, to keep up our spirits
and march forward, as she said, like stalwart soldiers.
The other teachers, poor things, were generally themselves
too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.
How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire
when we got back.
But to the little ones, at least, this was denied.
Each hearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded
by a double row of great girls, and behind them,
the younger children crouched in groups,
wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.
A little solace came at tea time,
in the shape of a double ration of bread,
a whole instead of a half slice,
with a delicious addition of a thin scrape of butter.
It was the hebdominal treat to which we all looked forward
from Sabbath to Sabbath.
I generally contrived to reserve a moiety
of this boundary past for myself,
but the remainder I was invariably obliged to part with.
The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart,
the church catechism and the fifth, sixth,
and seventh chapters of St. Matthew,
and in listening to a long sermon read by Miss Miller,
whose irrepressible yawns attested her weariness.
A frequent interlude of these performances
was the enactment of the part of Eudicus
by some half dozen of little girls,
who, overpowered with sleep, would fall down,
if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form,
and be taken up half dead.
The remedy was to thrust them forward
into the center of the schoolroom
and oblige them to stand there till the sermon was finished.
Sometimes their feet failed them,
and they sank together in a heap.
They were then propped up with the monitor's high stools.
I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst,
and indeed that gentleman was from home
during the greater part of the first month
after my arrival.
Perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend, the archdeacon,
his absence was a relief to me.
I need not say that I have my own reasons
for dreading his coming, but come he did at last.
One afternoon, I had then been three weeks at Lowood,
as I was sitting with a slate in my hand,
puzzling over a sum and long division,
my eyes, raised in abstraction to the window,
caught sight of a figure just passing.
I recognized almost instinctively that gaunt outline,
and when, two minutes after, all the school,
teachers included, rose en masse,
it was not necessary for me to look up
in order to ascertain whose entrance they thus greeted.
A long stride measured the schoolroom,
and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen,
stood the same black column which had frowned on me
so ominously from the hearth rug of Gateshead.
I now glance sideways at this piece of architecture.
Yes, I was right, it was Mr. Brocklehurst,
buttoned up in a certut, and looking longer,
narrower, and more rigid than ever.
I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition.
Too well I remembered the perfidious hints
given by Mrs. Reed about my disposition, et cetera,
the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst
to reprise Miss Temple and the teachers of a vicious nature.
All along, I had been dreading
the fulfillment of this promise.
I had been looking out daily for the coming man,
whose information respecting my past life and conversation
was to brand me as a bad child forever.
Now, there he was.
He stood at Miss Temple's side.
He was speaking low in her ear.
I did not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy,
and I watched her eye with painful anxiety,
expecting every moment to see its dark orb turn on me
a glance of repugnance and contempt.
I listened, too, and as I happened to be seated
quite at the top of the room, I caught most of what he said.
Its import relieved me from immediate apprehension.
I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Loughton
will do.
It struck me that it would be just of the quality
for the calico chemises, and I sorted the needles to match.
You may tell Miss Smith that I forgot to make
a memorandum of the darning needles,
but she shall have some papers sent in next week,
and she is not on any account to give out more
than one at a time to each pupil.
If they have more, they are apt to be careless
and lose them, and oh, ma'am.
I wish the woolen stockings were better looked to.
When I was here last, I went into the kitchen garden
and examined the clothes drying on the line.
There was a quantity of black hose
in a very bad state of repair.
From the size of the holes in them,
I was sure they had not been well mended from time to time.
He paused.
Your direction shall be attended to, sir, said Miss Temple.
And ma'am, he continued, the laundress tells me
some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week.
It is too much.
The rules limit them to one.
I think I can explain that circumstance, sir.
Agnes and Catherine Johnstone were invited to take tea
with some friends at Loughton last Thursday,
and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckers
for the occasion.
Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.
Well, for once it may pass,
but please not to let the circumstance occur too often.
And there is another thing which surprised me.
I find in settling accounts with the housekeeper
that a lunch consisting of bread and cheese
has twice been served out to the girls
during the past fortnight.
How is this?
I looked over the regulations
and I find no such meal as lunch mentioned.
Who introduced this innovation?
And by what authority?
I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,
replied Miss Temple.
The breakfast was so ill-prepared
that the pupils could not possibly eat it,
and I dared not allow them to remain fasting
till dinner time.
Madam, allow me an instant.
You are aware that my plan in bringing up these girls
is not to accustom them to habits of luxury and indulgence,
but to render them hearty, patient, self-denying.
Should any little accidental disappointment
of the appetite occur, such as the spoiling of a meal,
the under or the overdressing of a dish,
the incident ought not to be neutralized
by replacing with something more delicate
the comfort lost,
thus pampering the body
and obviating the sum of this institution.
It ought to be improved
to the spiritual edification of the pupils
by encouraging them to evince fortitude
under temporary probation.
A brief address on those occasions would not be mistimed,
wherein a judicious instructor
would take the opportunity of referring to the sufferings
of the primitive Christians
to the torments of martyrs,
to the exhortations of our blessed Lord himself,
calling upon his disciples
to take up the cross and follow him,
to his warnings that man should not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,
to his divine consolations.
If ye suffer hunger or thirst for my sake, happy are ye.
Oh, madam, when you put bread and cheese
instead of burnt porridge into these children's mouths,
you may indeed feed their vile bodies,
but you little think how you starve their immortal souls.
Mr. Brocklehurst again paused,
perhaps overcome by his feelings.
Miss Temple had looked down
when he first began to speak to her,
but she now gazed straight before her,
and her face, naturally pale as marble,
appeared to be assuming also the coldness
and fixity of that material, especially her mouth,
closed as if it would have required
a sculptor's chisel to open it,
and her brow settled gradually
into petrified severity.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth
with his hands behind his back,
majestically surveyed the whole school.
Suddenly, his eyes gave a blink,
as if it had meant something
that either dazzled or shocked its pupil.
Turning, he said in more rapid accents
that he had hitherto used,
Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what?
What is that girl with curled hair?
Red hair, ma'am, curled, curled all over.
And extending his cane, he pointed to the awful object,
his hand shaking as he did so.
It is Julia Severn, replied Miss Temple very quietly.
Julia Severn, ma'am, and why has she
or any other curled hair?
Why, in defiance of every precept
and principle of this house,
does she conform to the world so openly,
here in an evangelical charitable establishment
as to where her hair one mass of curls?
Julia's hair curls naturally,
returned Miss Temple, still more quietly.
Naturally, yes, but we are not to conform to nature.
I wish these girls to be the children of grace,
and why that abundance?
I have again and again intimated
that I desire the hair to be arranged closely,
modestly, plainly.
Miss Temple, that girl's hair must be cut off entirely.
I will send a borrower tomorrow,
and I see others who are far too much of the excretions.
That tall girl, tell her to turn round.
Tell all the first form to rise up
and direct their faces to the wall.
Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips,
as if to smooth away the involuntary smile
that curled them.
She gave the order, however,
and when the first class could take in
what was required of them, they obeyed.
Leaning a little back on my bench,
I could see the looks and grimaces
with which they commented on this maneuver.
It was a pity Mr. Rocklehurst could not see them, too.
He would perhaps have felt that.
Whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter,
the inside was farther beyond his interference
than he imagined.
He scrutinized the reverse of these living medals
some five minutes, then pronounced sentence.
These words fell like the knell of doom.
All those top knots must be cut off.
Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.
Madam, he would.
I have a master to serve,
whose kingdom is not of this world.
My mission is to mortify in these girls
the lust of the flesh,
to teach them to clothe themselves
with shame-facedness and sobriety,
not with braided hair and costly apparel.
And each of the young persons before us
has a string of hair twisted in plates,
which vanity itself might have woven.
These, I repeat, must be cut off.
Think of the time wasted of...
Mr. Rocklehurst was here interrupted.
Three other visitors, ladies, now entered the room.
They ought to have come a little sooner
to have heard his lecture on dress,
for they were splendidly attired
in velvet, silk, and furs.
The two younger of the trio,
fine girls of 16 and 17,
had gray beaver hats, then in fashion,
shaded with ostrich plumes,
and from under the brim of this graceful headdress
fell a profusion of light tresses elaborately curled.
The elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl,
trimmed with ermine,
and she wore a false front of French girls.
These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple
as Mrs. and Mrs. Rocklehurst,
and conducted to seats of honor at the top of the room.
It seems they had come in the carriage
with their reverend relative,
and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny
of the room upstairs,
while he transacted business with the housekeeper,
questioned the laundress,
and lectured the superintendent.
They now proceeded to address diverse remarks
and reproofs to Miss Smith,
who was charged with the care of the linen
in the inspection of the dormitories,
but I had no time to listen to what they said.
Other matters called off and enchanted my attention.
Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse
of Mrs. Rocklehurst and Miss Temple,
I had not, at the same time,
neglected precautions to secure my personal safety,
which I thought would be effected
if I could only elude observation.
To this end, I had sat well back on the form,
and while seeming to be busy with my sum,
had held my slate in such a manner as to conceal my face.
I might have escaped noticed,
had not my treacherous slate
somehow happened to slip from my hand
and fallen with an obtrusive crash,
directly drawn every eye upon me.
I knew it was all over now,
and as I stooped up to pick up the two fragments of slate,
I rallied my forces for the worst.
It came.
A careless girl, said Mr. Rocklehurst,
and immediately after, it is the new pupil I perceive.
And before I could draw a breath,
I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her.
That aloud, how loud it seemed to me,
let the child who broke her slate come forward.
Of my own accord, I could not have stirred.
I was paralyzed, but the two great girls
who sat on each side of me,
set me on my legs and pushed me towards the dread judge.
And then Miss Temple gently assisted me to his very feet,
and I caught her whispered counsel.
Don't be afraid, Jane.
I saw it was an accident.
You shall not be punished.
The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.
Another minute, and she'll despise me for hypocrite,
thought I, and an impulse of fury
against Reed, Rocklehurst, and company
bounded in my pulses at the conviction.
I was no Helen Burns.
Fetch that stool, said Mr. Rocklehurst,
pointing to a very high one
from which a monitor had just risen.
It was brought.
Place the child upon it.
And I was placed there, by whom I don't know.
I was in no condition to note particulars.
I was only aware that they had hoisted me up
to the height of Mr. Rocklehurst's nose,
that he was within a yard of me,
and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk polices
and a cloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.
Mr. Rocklehurst hemmed.
Ladies, said he, turning to his family,
Miss Temple, teachers, and children,
you all see this girl?
Of course they did, for I felt their eyes directed
like burning glasses against my scorched skin.
You see she is yet young.
You observe that she possesses
the ordinary form of childhood.
God has graciously given her the shape
that he has given to all of us.
No signal deformity points her out as a marked character.
Who would think that the evil one
has already found a servant and agent in her?
Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.
A pause, in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves,
and to feel that the Rubicon had passed.
And that the trial, no longer to be shirked,
must be firmly sustained.
My dear children, pursued the black marble clergyman,
with pathos, this is a sad, a melancholy occasion.
For it becomes my duty to warn you that this girl,
who might be one of God's own lambs, is a little cast away.
Not a member of the true flock,
but evidently an interloper and an alien.
You must be on your guard against her.
You must shun her example.
If necessary, avoid her company.
Exclude her from your sports,
and shut her out from your converse.
Teachers, you must watch her.
Keep your eyes on her movements.
Weigh well her words.
Scrutinize her actions.
Punish her body to save her soul.
If, indeed, such salvation be possible.
For, my tongue falters while I tell it,
this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land,
worse than many a little heathen
who says its prayers to Brahma and kneels before Juggernaut,
this girl is a liar.
Now came a pause of 10 minutes,
during which I, by this time,
in perfect possession of my wits,
observed all the female Brocklehursts
produce their pocket handkerchiefs
and apply them to their optics,
while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro,
and the two younger ones whispered, how shocking.
Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.
This I learned from her benefactress,
from the pious and charitable lady
who adopted her in her orphaned state,
reared her as her own daughter,
and whose kindness, whose generosity,
the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude so bad,
so dreadful, that at last her excellent patroness
was obliged to separate her from her own young ones,
fearful lest her vicious examples
should contaminate their purity.
She has sent her here to be healed.
Even as the Jews of old sent their disease
to the troubled pool of Bethesda,
and teachers, superintendent,
I beg of you not to allow the waters
to stagnate around her.
With this sublime conclusion,
Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the top button of her Sertut,
muttered something to his family, who rose,
bowed to Miss Temple,
and then all the great people sailed in state from the room.
Turning at the door, my judge said,
Let her stand half an hour longer on that stool,
and let no one speak to her during the remainder of the day.
There was I then, mounted aloft,
I, who had said I could not bear the shame
of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room,
was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy.
What my sensations were no language can describe,
but just as they all rose, stifling my breath,
and constricting my throat,
a girl came up and passed me.
In passing, she lifted her eyes.
What a strange light inspired them!
What an extraordinary sensation that rays sent through me!
How the new feeling bore me up!
It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or victim,
and imparted strength in the transit.
I mastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my head,
and took a firm stand on the stool.
Helen Burns asked some slight question
about her work of Miss Smith.
Was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry,
returned to her place, and smiled at me as she again went by.
What a smile!
I remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence
of fine intellect, of true courage.
It lit up her marked liniments, her thin face,
her sunken gray eye, like a reflection
from the aspect of an angel.
Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm
the untidy badge.
Scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned
by Miss Scatchard to a dinner of bread and water
on the morrow, because she had blotted in exercise
and copying it out.
Such is the imperfect nature of man.
Such spots are there on the disk of the clearest planet,
and eyes like Miss Scatchard's can only
see those minute defects and are blind to the full brightness
of the orb.
End of chapter 7.